in this video we will discuss how to insert a
new node at the beginning of it
doubly linked list
So what is a doubly linked list and how is
it different from a singly Linked list Unlike Singly
linked List we have two references prev and next in
doubly linked list
And after each operation we have to maintain both prev
and next
So here we have an example of it
doubly linked list with elements 10 20 30
So if we insert new node 100 it will be
inserted at the beginning and we will get the new
doubly linked list like this 100 10 20 and 30
So let us see how to insert a new node
at the beginning
So here we have two cases the first case is when
the doubly linked list is empty
Then the new node inserted will be the only node
and it will become the head node
The second case is when the doubly linked list has at least
one node
Then the new node will be inserted before current head
and current head points to new node
And now make the new node the new head
Now let us see the Java programme to insert new
node at the beginning of it Doubly linked list
So this is the function which will add the new
node at the beginning
We will pass the value to be added to the
function at first and it will create a new node
with that value and inserted at the beginning
So write public void at first of int val so
let us see how it works
So here first we have an empty doubly linked list
So head is equal to null now
Now let us insert and node with value ten so we
will call the function Add first by passing the value ten
so let us see what happens So here Val is equal to
The first step is to create the new node using
new so write node new node equal to new node
So we have a new node created at address 1000
Now at the pass value to the data part of
the new node So write new node dot data equal
to val so 10 is added to the data part
Now if the doubly linked list is empty the new
node will be the only node and it should become
the head otherwise we can insert the new node just
before the head
So we need to check it
So write if head equal to null
And here we have head equal to null
So if returns true it means we have a currently
empty doubly linked List
And the new node that we are going to insert
now will be the only node in this list
And it should become the head
So there is no previous node or next node so
make its next and prev point to null
So write new node dot prev equal to null and
new nodes dot next equal to null
And the next step is to make this node the
head of the list write head equal to new node
So head has the address 1000 now and it points
to this new node
So we have inserted a new node at the beginning
of the doubly linked list
So now we have a doubly linked list with one
node
Now let us insert another node with value 20 so
first create the node using new
So the node is created at address 2000
Like this
Now the next step is to add the value at
data part
So write new node dot data equal to val so 20
is added at the data part
Now check
If the DLL is empty and if it is empty
head will be equal to null
But here it is not so if will fail and
the control goes to else part
So the doubly linked list is not empty
So the new node should be inserted before the current
head node
So said new node dot equal to null and new node
dot next equal to head So 1000 will be stored
in new nodes
Next part and current heads brief should point to the
new node So set head dot prev equal to new node
So 2000 will be stored in its prev now
all the linked list are set correctly Now the new node
should be the new head So set head equal to
new node So head will now have the address 2000
Now let us insert another node with value 30 So
first create the new node using new So the node
created at address 3000 like this now at the value
30 at the data part
So write new node dot data equal to Val so
30 is added at the data part
Now we need to check if the doubly linked list
is empty
Now So check If head is equal to null
But it is not so go to else part and
the new node should be inserted before the current head
So set new node dot prev equal to null and new node
dot next equal to head
So the prev and next of new node is set
correctly
But the current heads prev is still pointing null so
make it a point to the new node
So write head dot prev equal to new node
now All the links are okay
Now we need to make the new node the new
head of the list so write head equal to new node
So Head will now have the address 3000
So that is how we can insert nodes at the
beginning of it
Doubly linked list
Now let us discuss about the time complexity of this
operation
Since we know the position of the node to be
inserted that is we have to insert at the beginning
only we need to make some changes to prev and
next reference which will only take a constant time
So the time complexity of this operation is order of one